# Superfast electrons moving in an ultrathin wire
### Background introduction to the research work
This is a part of the work I have conducted from 2015-2017 when I was doing my PhD in Peking University. As one of the early exploration in pursing new electronic materials, this work is a perfect example to show the motion of electrons in a very very thin wire (500 times thinner than an average human hair).  Of course, the thin wire must be conductive like electrical wires. The electrons moving in the wire is also extraordinary, which physicists believe to be the so-called "Dirac fermion" moving in a speed comparable to 1/300 of the speed of light, so Einstein's relativity theory plays a role here. 

### Is physics sexy?
#####  An electron in a crystal
One may know, no matter how small a particle is, its motion is still governed by "some" physical rules. If it moves slowly enough in our daily life (way slower than the speed of light), Newtonian mechanics should still suffice  to explain, and in microscopic world, it is Schrödinger equation. As the electron moves faster and faster, the effect of relativity is no longer negligible which makes the physics even sexier, a combination of two pillars of modern physics - quantum mechanics and relativity.

Note, that it is always helpful to understand science that seems to be far away from your daily life by imaging you are the object to be studied, here you are one of the super fast electrons.  You are an electron, but not move freely in vacuum, welcome to the world of crystals. The crystal is usually made of more than one kind of atoms well aligned in space, and each of the atoms usually attract or repel electron moving aside.  As you travel in a crytal, you may feel like rushing into a fully occupied, leaving bus at the bus stop, that many people just stand in your way but some behind you also push you forward. Awkwardly, the people surrounding you are very much organized and almost stand still but do some action onto your body. You might not feel comfortable to be honest. Finally, you make your way though and get off the bus, now you just finish the journey of an electron moving in a crystal. Not fun at all. What is amazing in physics is what you as an electron has experienced can be described by a mathematical formula. It is this mathematics guide you to get through a crystal and a different crystal has a different mathematical formula (we talk a lot of symmetry of potential in physics), so we can always find new mathematical formula in new materials. 

##### An electron in a magnetic field
Human beings have developed magnificent achievements in understanding electromagnetic waves, fundamentally changed everyone's life. You probably know electrons will respond to the magnetic field from a magnet and move in different way. Reversely, the motion of electron also generate a magnetic field. So there are some interactions between magnetic field and an electron. But usually, we assume the magnetic field is constant offered by some powerful setup. In vacuum, the magnetic field will force the electron to bend its trajectory into a circle due to [Lorentz force](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorentz_force). Not very differently, this also happens in a crystal but only the particular mathematics changes a bit. And if we reduce the dimensions of a crystal to one, that means cutting a cube into a thin tube, something interesting may happen.  Before that, we also need to understand an electron is not only a particle as we see as a tiny "ball" but also a wave-like particle. It is the essence of quantum mechanics, a particle can sometimes behaves like a solid ball but sometimes like a wave, the famous [wave-particle duality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave%E2%80%93particle_duality).  So the magnetic field bends the trajectory of a particle-like electron and meanwhile it also changes the phase of a wave-like electron. As an electron travels in a magnetic field, the phase change will accumulate and finally this phase shift can be detected by interference with other waves.  

##### An electron travels on the surface only
It is almost impossible to "see" an electron moving as a microscopic particle. According to quantum mechanics, an electron can not be detected in position and velocity simultaneously, so-called [Heisenberg uncertainty principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty_principle). In plain words, you may "see" an electron at a moment, but you have no clue about its motion or vice verse. Then how do we know if an electron is moving inside the nanowire or on its surface?  It turns out the wave-property of an electron helps us here.  As known before, an electron can interfere with others at the end of a journey and this interference leads to some kind of interference pattern (You may imagine some bright and dark stripes, but not that kind...). We read this interference from the changes in voltage, yes, very tiny voltage (In condensed matter physics, it is called A-B oscillation). To see the change of interference we also need to change the magnitude of magnetic field, altering the phase shift in one direction.  In principle, we know the phase shift accumulated between two electrons split and meet-up again, then we know the length of path.  In the absence of magnetic field, the phase shift is zero. If we add a small magnetic field to shift the phase until we see the first "bright stripe" (a peak in detected voltage), then we know the phase shift is supposed to be 360 degree. Then the magic happens as we did the calculation, it is found that the length of path must be half of the circumstance of the nanowire to give a shift of 360 degree in phase. What does this mean? It means the electron should wobbles around the nanowire and be on its surface always. This made determination of the diameter of nanowires critical in our research, we have detected different period in magnetic field for thinner or thicker nanowires. In general, we get a large period in thinner wires, it translates into the electron travels less in thinner wires before interference but in stronger magnetic field to gain the same phase shift - 360 degree. All the results say that, the electron should be on the surface and circle around the perimeter of nanowire. 

##### Why is it so interesting?
First, it is very hard to observe the interference of electron in real life. Electrons are quite small and hard to control. And in real materials, there are many imperfections like defects, dislocation. They can kill the interference of electron easily by bouncing back the electron and erasing its memory of phase. So the material must be very clean, contains very few imperfections. On the other hand, to reduce the total number of defects, the material should be small in one dimension at least. The material we used here was self-grown in furnace ovens. The powder of materials was heated up to roughly 1000 Celsius and its molecules are collected at downstream where they crystallize naturally into high-quality crystals - nanowires. 

Second, it is an interesting observation that supports the prediction of surface electron in this material which is confined to the interface of materials and vacuum.  It is a remarkable discovery a decade ago, theorists proposed some novel properties of surface electron governed by Dirac equation (relativity-version of Schrödinger equation), and experimentalists realized that in HgTe, a prototype material I am studying now in Germany. Though, surface electron is not something new, but this particular kind of surface electron is predicted to be useful in fundamental physics and future applications like quantum computation and low-loss energy transmission plan. It is the first time experimentalists report such a phenomenon in this kind of materials, so it gained much attention and a lot citations by then. 

##### Some unsolved myth
Since it is the very first report of A-B effect in this particular material, there are some features not fully understood. What we found is, as continuously changing the magnetic field, the interference jumps from constructive to destructive between the 3rd and 4th period, which is unexpected. Afterwards, it continues with no more jump. We discussed somehow this may come from the degeneracy-lift of "Dirac node", but not sure. Till now, we still don't know if this is just a coincidence or some serious physics there. We tends to believe the former, since it is not so repeatable in other samples investigated. 


##### Experiment-wise notes in the end
A bit background for you here. As an experimentalist in quantum transport, we usually measure small electrical voltage as a probe of the electron behavior. This may sound magical and abstract, but I will gradually show you how an experimentalist work with very small materials. We use some high-precision tools to lay metal legs on the nanowires to apply voltage or current later on. Then we also measure through the metal legs. Since a piece of metal has so many electrons moving actively inside and these electrons can overcome the barrier of junction and flow into the material interfaced with, for example the nanowire underneath.  As a result, any change of the nanowire will lead to a consequence of electrons in the metal, by such, we are enabled to detect the nanowire merely though the metal legs.  Given the small cross-section of nanowires, a tiny current will be very intensive in the material and heat it up or even melt it down. So we only apply a tiny current around 100 nA though the metal legs finally into the nanowire. To give you a feeling how small it is, to power a 60-Watt light bulb, you often need the current to be $10^7$ times larger. In practice, *ac* current with low-frequency was used to get a better noise ratio  in our measurements empowered by some advanced/expensive electrical equipment (each of them worth roughly a car). 






